## Gear Up Pre-Work
### Turing Culture: Developing Empathetic Programmers

_Our **mission** is to unlock human potential by training a diverse, inclusive student body to succeed in high-fulfillment technical careers._

### Why Empathy?
* Interpersonal skills (including empathy) have a direct, significant impact on your professional success.
* Empathy is a foundational interpersonal skill. Other skills, such as collaboration, communication, compromise all hinge on your ability to demonstrate empathy.
* Interpersonal skills, including empathy, can be developed and improved.
* Turing's mission (cited above) demands that we support students development of technical _and_ interpersonal skills. 

### Pre-Work Preparation
#### Read
Read _two_ of the following articles/videos (we recommend all of them!) and reflect on these questions: why are we talking about empathy at a software development school? how can you develop the "skill" of empathy? and why should you care?

* ["Why is Empathy Important for Design"](http://www.bresslergroup.com/blog/why-empathic-design/)
* ["The Surprising (Nontechnical) Skill You Need to Succeed in Tech"](https://www.themuse.com/advice/the-surprising-and-nontechnical-skill-you-need-to-succeed-in-tech), _The Muse_
* ["Why Aren't We More Compassionate?"](http://www.ted.com/talks/daniel_goleman_on_compassion#t-39146), TED Talk (Daniel Goleman)
* ["Can you teach people to have empathy?"](http://www..com/news/magazine-33287727), BBC (Jun 29, 2015)
* ["Three Kinds of Empathy"](http://www.danielgoleman.info/three-kinds-of-empathy-cognitive-emotional-compassionate/), Daniel Goleman
* ["The Importance of Empathy in Our Services-Centric, People-Oriented Economy"](http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2015/10/09/the-importance-of-empathy-in-our-services-centric-people-oriented-economy/), _Wall Street Journal Blog_ (Oct 9, 2015)

#### Reflect
After reading the articles above, create a gist on Github and reflect (4-6 sentences) on the following prompts.
* **What role does empathy play in your life and how has it helped you?**  Empathy is a fundamental part of communication and it is necessary in order to understand and engage with others in a meaningful way.  I use empathy when making decisions which will effect others, understanding situations which aren't directly connected to me, and helping others with issues in their lives.  My ability to do these things is directly connected to my ability to empathize with others and step into their shoes.  Empathy has helped me to understand the struggles of the less fortunate and acknowledge my place in the world as well as how my actions affect others.  
* **How does empathy help you build better software?** Empathic design allows for companies to determine how they can best tailor their product or service to match the needs and wants of the customer.  Establishing a relationship with the customer and stepping into their shoes can give important and useful insight into what they are looking for in the product and how to best satisfy them.  This technique puts designers directly in touch with their market and has the effect of increasing their ability to create a product that satisfies their customers.  According to the first article, "The Design Council found that companies “identified to be effective users of design,” outperformed the FTSE 100 index by 200% over a period of ten years."  This thoroughly demonstrates the positive effect that empathic design has on a company's ability to sell a well designed product.
* **Why is empathy important for working on a team?**  Communication at a base level is incredibly optimized by empathy.  The 4th article states that "Radical listening can have an extraordinary impact on resolving conflict situations. Rosenberg points out that in employer-employee disputes, if both sides literally repeat what the other side just said before speaking themselves, conflict resolution is reached 50% faster."  Radical listening is the act of simply listening to what others have to say and attempting to empathize with them.  When collaborating, empathy also can allow for a mutual understanding of each others' strengths, weaknesses, wants, and needs.  Properly leveraging strengths and satisfying team mates' wants and needs is a fundamental part of collaboration and drastically strengthens the team.
* **Describe a situation in which your ability to empathize with a colleague or teammate was helpful.**  In my Game Design class in high school, we were assigned a large project spanning multiple months to create a functional game which meets certain standards.  The groups for this project were random and a week or two in, the group's productivity began to slip.  Some of the members of the group whose task was to implement certain features into the game were missing deadlines.  This resulted in a lower grade for the entire group.  As a result of this, I was taking on more than my share of work.  Rather than accepting this, I tried to understand why some of my group mates were not contributing.  After talking with them briefly, I realized that they had gotten stuck.  I then offered to help them work though their problems and gave them strategies on how to address similar situations in the future.  After I had helped them, they were able to keep up with the deadlines and asked me for help occasionally.  In this situation, empathizing with my group fixed the issue and resulted in the group completing the project on time.  
* **When do you find it most difficult to be empathetic in professional settings? How can you improve your skills when faced with these scenarios?**  In high school, it was not uncommon to have those as groupmates who viewed the project or task at hand at a lower importance than I did.  As a result, they would be less willing to put forth effort and time to pull their weight in the project.  However, this was not always the cause for a lack of productivity.  In these scenarios where others placed the burden of the work on their peers, I would sometimes become frustrated and have trouble putting myself in their shoes.  However, while a simple answer might be to chalk up their actions to laziness, they were often unable to start or unsure how to contribute.  When this was the case, delegating specific parts of the project to them or helping them through the work would cause them to be more productive and transform them from being a freeloader to a valuable member of the team.  While frustration blocks my ability to empathize, stepping back and attempting to look at things from a different angle removes that block and improves my ability to empathize as a whole.
